Proposal: Moving hooks on thread (#205)
nodejs/loaders: doc/design/proposal-moving-hooks-on-thread.md

1. Support most or all of the use cases currently covered by the off-thread hooks.

1. Complement @joyeecheung’s [Universal, synchronous and in-thread loader hooks proposal](https://github.com/nodejs/loaders/pull/198). We want one set of hooks for both CommonJS and ES modules, and that single set of hooks should both allow for both sunsetting monkey-patching and sunsetting the off-thread hooks.

## Design

This proposal builds on the [Universal, synchronous and in-thread loader hooks proposal](https://github.com/nodejs/loaders/pull/198). First we would implement the new `registerHooks` API from that proposal, which creates sync `resolve`, `load` and other hooks. That should cover that proposal’s primary goal of providing new APIs for monkey-patchers to migrate to, allowing us to sunset the need to support monkey-patching the CommonJS loader.

Once that is achieved, there is one large gap left to fill before we can remove the off-thread hooks: provide a way to perform async work, now that the hooks are all sync.

### `startGraph` hook (module graph entry point only)

> We would create a new _async_ hook that runs for the main entry point, any worker entry point, and any dynamic `import()`: in other words, before any new module graph is created. This would be an opportunity to do async work that the later sync hooks could have access to, for example to make network calls in a non-blocking way. One of the use cases for this hook is to support network imports, such as the [Import from HTTPS example](https://nodejs.org/api/module.html#import-from-https) in our docs. See [`nodejs/node` #43245](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/43245).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We would create a new _async_ hook that runs for the main entry point, any worker entry point, and any dynamic `import()`: in other words, before any new module graph is created. This hook would delay any further hooks for that module graph operation, until the `startGraph` hook promise has resolved successfully. This provides an opportunity to do async work that the later sync hooks could have access to, for example to make network calls in a non-blocking way. One of the use cases for this hook is to support network imports, such as the [Import from HTTPS example](https://nodejs.org/api/module.html#import-from-https) in our docs. See [`nodejs/node` #43245](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/43245).
```

```js
/**
 * @typedef {{
 *   parentURL?: string,
 *   entry: boolean,
 *   conditions?: string[],
 *   importAttributes?: Record<string, string>,
 *   resolve: Function,
 *   load: Function,
 * }} ModuleStartGraphContext
 */
/**
 * @typedef {Promise<{
 *   shortCircuit?: boolean
 * }>} ModuleStartGraphResult
 */
/**
 * @param {string} specifier
 * @param {ModuleStartGraphContext} context
 * @param {(specifier: string, context: ModuleStartGraphContext) => ModuleStartGraphResult} nextStartGraph
 * @returns {ModuleStartGraphResult}
 */
async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {}
```

## Examples

### Import from HTTPS

the [Import from HTTPS example](https://nodejs.org/api/module.html#import-from-https) in our docs could use `startGraph` to handle the async work:

```js
import { parseAllImportSpecifiersFromSource } from 'some-library';

/** @type {Map<URL['href'], string | Buffer} */
const httpImportsCache = new Map();

export async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {
  const { resolve, load } = context;
  const specifiers = [specifier];
  while (specifiers.length > 0) {
    const specifier = specifiers.pop();

>     const { url } = resolve(specifier, context);

Reviewer: This won't handle relative normalization within transitive child dependencies correctly.

Instead, replace the `specifiers` list with a `urls` list, resolving the URLs upfront. Then use a context that is created based on the current URL `resolve(specifier, { parentURL: '' })`.

Then in the resolve API, the resolve context should be automatically sanitized - with attributes and conditions added to their default values (`[]` and `[...envConditions]` respectively).

For the problem of not knowing if we are resolving CJS or ESM when passing the conditions in the above, perhaps the best trick here would be to automatically infer the `import` or `require` condition based on the `parentURL` itself checking against the module registry.

> export async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {
>   const { resolve, load } = context;
>   const specifiers = [specifier];
>   while (specifiers.length > 0) {
>     const specifier = specifiers.pop();
>     const { url } = resolve(specifier, context);
>     if (httpImportsCache.has(url)) {
>       continue;
>     }
>     if (url.startsWith('https://')) {
>       const response = await fetch(url);
>       const responseSource = await response.text();
>       httpImportsCache.set(url, responseSource);
>       const { source } = load(url, context);
>       httpImportsCache.set(url, source);
>       specifiers.push(...parseAllImportSpecifiersFromSource(source));
>     }
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {
  const { resolve, load } = context;
  const { url } = resolve(specifier, context);
  const urls = [url];
  while (urls.length > 0) {
    const url = urls.shift();
    if (url.startsWith('https://')) {
      const response = await fetch(url);
      const responseSource = await response.text();
      httpImportsCache.set(url, responseSource);
    }
    // load API constructs context automatically from registry data
    const { source } = load(url);
    httpImportsCache.set(url, source);
    for (const specifier of parseAllImportSpecifiersFromSource(source)) {
      // resolve API also constructs context automatically from registry data
      // including determining if the parent is CJS or ESM and setting conditions
      // correctly. Even when conditions is provided, although explicit import
      // or require conditions can override this process.
      const depUrl = resolve(specifier, { parentURL: url });
      urls.push(depUrl);
    }
  }
```

```js
/**
 * @typedef {{
 *   parentURL?: string,
 *   entry: boolean,
 *   conditions?: string[],
 *   importAttributes?: Record<string, string>,
 *   resolve: Function,
 *   load: Function,
 * }} ModuleStartGraphContext
 */
/**
 * @typedef {Promise<{
 *   shortCircuit?: boolean
 * }>} ModuleStartGraphResult
 */
/**
 * @param {string} specifier
 * @param {ModuleStartGraphContext} context
 * @param {(specifier: string, context: ModuleStartGraphContext) => ModuleStartGraphResult} nextStartGraph
 * @returns {ModuleStartGraphResult}
 */
async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {}
```

## Examples

### Import from HTTPS

the [Import from HTTPS example](https://nodejs.org/api/module.html#import-from-https) in our docs could use `startGraph` to handle the async work:

```js
import { parseAllImportSpecifiersFromSource } from 'some-library';

/** @type {Map<URL['href'], string | Buffer} */
const httpImportsCache = new Map();

> export async function startGraph(specifier, context, nextStartGraph) {

Reviewer 2: What does `nextStartGraph` provide that a simple `done()` callback does not?

Author: 1. It follows the pattern of the other hooks.
2. If multiple sets of hooks define `startGraph`, you can return `{ shortCircuit: true }` from yours to prevent the others from running.

  const { resolve, load } = context;
  const { url } = resolve(specifier, context);
  const urls = [url];
  while (urls.length > 0) {
    const url = urls.shift();
    if (url.startsWith('https://')) {
      const response = await fetch(url);
      const responseSource = await response.text();
      httpImportsCache.set(url, responseSource);
    }
    // load API constructs context automatically from registry data
    const { source } = load(url);
    httpImportsCache.set(url, source);

>     for (const specifier of parseAllImportSpecifiersFromSource(source)) {

Reviewer 3: Note that only works for the top-level module and doesn't work for the graphs nested inside.

Author: What do you mean? This loop runs for all modules within this graph, and the hook runs again for any new graph.

Reviewer 3: If you have

```
import('root');
```

And

```
import 'a';
import 'b';
import 'c';
```

This only runs for `root`, not for `a`/`b`/`c` since they are not in the root.

Author: Yes, hence the helper to parse the imports and then loop through them and resolve and load each one. It's essentially parsing the whole graph in miniature within this hook.

Reviewer 3: It is not doing it recursively, however. But even if you implement it recursively, it can only add logic at either end of the load chain, but not in the middle.

Author: The user is responsible for deciding where in the chain a hook goes, by order of registration. And I’m not sure what “doing it recursively” means. This isn’t following the same evaluation order as ESM, where it goes from the leaves of the tree back to the root, but that’s not necessary for the particular use case in this example. There are other solutions such as `Atomics.wait` etc for doing async work in `load` if maintaining evaluation order is important to the particular customization use case.

Reviewer: The code here does run for `'a'`, `'b'` and `'c'` because the work list gets appended with the new URLs at the end of the loop per the standard approaches for writing a recursive function as a loop.

Author: I think this note can be resolved? It’s doing recursion through a traditional loop, like Guy wrote.

      // resolve API also constructs context automatically from registry data
      // including determining if the parent is CJS or ESM and setting conditions
      // correctly. Even when conditions is provided, although explicit import
      // or require conditions can override this process.
      const depUrl = resolve(specifier, { parentURL: url });
      urls.push(depUrl);
    }
  }
  return nextStartGraph(specifier, context);
}

> export function resolve(specifier, context, defaultResolve) {

Reviewer 2: What is the opinion of requiring a `resolved: true || false` as part of the return object instead of needing to deal with `defaultResolve`? For example:

```js
function resolve(specifier, context) {
	if (specifier.startsWith('something') === true) {
		// do work
		return { resolved: true }
	}

	return { resolved: false }
}
```

In this way, the hook doesn't need to worry about invoking some other resolver. It merely needs to indicate to the thing doing resolution that the hook did the work, or the hook is expecting the resolver to try the next hook (or fallback to its normal implementation).

Author: I think this is already covered by `shortCircuit: true`?

Reviewer 2: Maybe? If so, why does `defaultResolve` need to exist?

Author: I don’t follow the question. Are you referring to the `next` argument?

Again, this document doesn’t propose any changes to `resolve`. It’s used here as part of a larger example.

  if (specifier.startsWith('https://')) {
    return {
      url: specifier,
      shortCircuit: true,
    };
  }
  return defaultResolve(specifier, context);
}

> export function load(url, context, defaultLoad) {

Reviewer 2: Same question as with `resolve`. What about merely requiring `{ loaded: true || false }` as the returned result?

Author: This document doesn’t propose any changes to `load`. It’s only mentioned here as part of an example.
